all right
so we proved these uh two theorems last
time and we used them for
and we had a couple applications of them
so the first theorem simple theorem was
that
a sequence converges to x if and only if
the limit as n goes to infinity of the
absolute value of x n minus x goes to
zero and then we also have the squeeze
theorem that if you have two c if you
have three sequences a sub n
uh b sub n and x of n so that x of n is
in between a sub n and b sub n and the a
sub n and b sub n converge to the same
thing
then the sequence x sub n converges and
it converges to
the common limit
of a sub n and b sub n so x of n gets
squeezed in between a sub n and b sub n
[Applause]
and
last time we used this to prove
a kind of
special limit
that
this equals zero
if the absolute value of c is less than
one so i had proved it for c positive
and maybe
c less than one but
same proof works with absolute values
just because
the absolute value of c to the n equals
uh the absolute value of c
raised to the nth power
so let's use this to do a few more
special limits if you like
but first i'm going to state the
binomial theorem i'm not going to prove
it but
it's
a simple exercise using uh induction
and the binomial theorem says that
we're all in the natural numbers
x y and r
x plus y raised to the n is equal to the
sum from k equals 0 to n
of n choose k
x to the n minus k
y to the k and here n choose k
this is equal to n factorial over k
factorial divided by n minus
times n minus k factorial
okay
so again you can prove this by inducting
on n
all right
okay so
we have a theorem so we'll prove a few
special limits
i have a real number that's positive
then
the limit as n goes to the goes to
infinity of one over n
to p
equals zero
if p is positive then
limit as n goes to infinity of
p
to the one over n equals one
and the third is
it's just that a certain limit exists
limit as n goes to infinity of n to the
one over n
equals one okay
um let me make a small comment here
so so far uh
in our discussion of the real numbers
we've kind of only defined what it means
to take
a real number to
an integer
power
but
and
nth roots
right
so we have
nth powers and nth roots so using that
we can then define
how to take a real number to a rational
power although there needs to be
something that's checked to make sure
this is well defined because you can
always write a rational number at you
know not uniquely as one integer over
another
um
so we can
define
a
a positive real number to
rational power
but
you know using really only the
elementary
facts about the real numbers the fact
that it has the least upper bound
property
and the fact that the rationals are
somehow dense in the real numbers we can
then define
what it means to take a positive real
number
to a positive real number power okay
all of that is just to say that to
define
a positive real number to a positive
real number or to a real number power
doesn't require the introduction of the
exponential or logarithm although they
in the end too agree they both agree
once you do have the exponential in the
logarithm
so all of that is just to say that
what we've done up to now
these things actually do make sense you
don't need the exponential in the
logarithm to make sense of
a
positive real number to a real number
power
okay
but we're just going to use the the
basic properties of
exponents
throughout all this so we don't
i mean we haven't even talked about
continuity or derivatives or anything
like that so we'll just use elementary
means to be able to to prove these
statements
okay
so for the first one we'll prove this
actually just using the definition of
the limit
which remember means for every epsilon
positive there we should be able to find
a capital number m such that if n is
bigger than or equal to capital m one
over n to the p
is less than epsilon
so
let epsilon be positive
choose
m a natural number
such that
m is greater than or equal to
is greater than one over epsilon
to the one over p
okay
and if n is bigger than or equal to m
one over n to the p minus zero
which equals one over n to the p this is
less than or equal to one over capital m
to the p
so here
again i'm using kind of an elementary
fact that we all know is that if i have
a positive power here
then
and little n is bigger than or equal to
capital m then n to the p would be
bigger than or equal to m capital m to
the p
we do know that for
integer exponents but
just trust me that one can define
non-integer exponents and that
inequality remains true as long as the
power that you're using is positive
so i have one over n to the p is less
than or equal to one over capital m to
the p
and by our choice of capital m this is
less than epsilon okay so that proves
number one
so number two
um
we'll do
we really only need to do uh
kind of two cases
one is
you know p so p equals one is fine
this is clear because then i just get
one for the
whole sequence
so that's one case now let me do
p bigger than one
okay
and if p is bigger than one
the absolute value value of p to the
one over n
minus 1 this is just p to the
1 over n minus 1.
and so i want to show that this
quantity here goes to 0.
okay
then
so
we have an inequality which we proved
actually um in the second lecture i
think using induction but you can
actually get from the binomial theorem
as well
is
so let me just recall this right here
that
we have this inequality that if x is
bigger than or equal to minus 1
then 1 plus x
raised to the n is bigger than or equal
to 1 plus nx
okay
and so we use this inequality now with x
equals
p minus 1.
so
p
this is equal to 1 plus
p to the 1 over n minus 1
raised to the nth power
i'm sorry x
is p to the one over n minus one not p
minus one
um
and now we use this inequality this is
bigger than or equal to
this thing times n plus one
so then i'll go over here
so now subtracting the 1 and divided by
n tells me that
p to the 1 over n minus 1 is less than
or equal to
p minus 1 over n
and as we noted here since p is bigger
than 1 this is bigger than or equal to
0.
okay
and now we apply the squeeze theorem
by squeeze theorem
uh
this is just going to 0. p minus 1
divided by n it's just a number over n
this goes to 0 as n goes to infinity in
fact that's contained in number one
um for p equals one and also by our
um
limit uh facts that we proved from last
time that the limit respects the
algebraic operations of the real numbers
so by the squeeze theorem
since this converges to zero and this
converges to zero
this converges to zero
which
implies that
okay
so that deals with the case uh p is
bigger than one
to deal with p less than one
we use the case p bigger than one and
again the fact that limits respect
algebraic operations
and we write the limit as p
look at p
make that better
the limit as n goes to infinity of p to
the one over n now p is less than one so
one over p
is bigger than one this is equal to the
limit as
n goes to infinity of one over
one over p
to the one over n
and now 1 over p is bigger than 1 raised
to the 1 over n power converges to 1 by
the case we did before
and so 1 over this converges to 1 over 1
equals one
okay
okay so um
let me just remark
that although we did prove this uh
inequality for
um
by induction it actually follows from
um the binomial theorem
and we'll use the binomial theorem to
get
a little bit of a
different inequality
that we'll use for number three
so for number three we want to prove
limit as n goes to infinity
of
n over one over n equals one
so rather than uh keep writing into the
one over n minus one which i want to
show converges to zero now i'm gonna
write x in so let
x n
equal n to the
1 over n minus 1 which we know is bigger
than or equal to 0 for all n
okay and so my goal
i want to show
is limit as x as n goes to infinity of x
sub n equals 0. all right because then
that proves that this converges to 0 and
since this is equal to its absolute
value that means that n to the 1 over n
converges to 1.
and the way we're going to do that is
using an inequality we get from the
binomial theorem
and
okay so and using kind of this trick
here
now if we look at
1 plus x to the n
raised to the n
this is just
that's just n let me move it over a
little bit
plus x to the n
raised to the n x to the n x sub n is n
to the one over n minus one add one i
get n to the one over n raised to n i
get n
now
by the binomial theorem this is equal to
sum from k equals 0
to n
and choose k
and
i have 1 raised to the n minus k power
x to the n
raised to the k
okay
now this is a sum of non-negative things
because x sub n is always
non-negative and these coefficients are
just
uh
quotients of factorial so they're always
non-negative as well so it's this sum is
always bigger than or equal to
one term from the sum
so it's bigger than or equal to k equals
2 say
y 2
you'll see
x sub n
squared
now
n choose 2 this is equal to
n factorial
over 2 factorial n minus 2
factorial x to the n squares x sub n
squared
which equals n times
n minus 1 over 2
x of n squared
all right now i started off with n and i
proved it was bigger than or equal to
this quantity here
[Applause]
so now i divide what's in front of the x
sub n
and take square roots
so then that implies
that
we're all n bigger than 1 because i need
to divide by
n minus 1
0 which is bigger than or equal to n
x sub n is less than or equal to
2 over n minus 1
square root
okay
and now this
is just 0 so it converges to zero
this right hand side is square root of
two over n minus one
now the limit as n goes to infinity of
two over n minus one is zero
square root of that also converges to
zero that's a fact we did from the end
of last time so this whole thing
converges to zero
so
by the squeeze theorem
limit as n goes to infinity of x sub n
which remember this is just n to the one
over n minus one
which implies
okay
and that completes the proof
all right so now we are going to
study a couple of objects related to a
bounded sequence so
why uh why are we gonna
um
what's the underlying question we're
gonna try to answer
whenever
something's introduced
you should think of it in terms of
what's the question that was asked that
this is trying to answer
so we're now moving on to the topic of
limb soup
and lim imph
of a sequence
so here's the question
so
we've seen sequences that
don't necessarily converge like -1 to
the n
but
and we know about subsequences now where
you just kind of pick entries along the
sequence
you pick one move to the right and pick
pick the next one
now if you look at minus one to the n if
i just look at the subsequence
consisting of picking the odd entries
the odd numbered entries in the sequence
and i just get minus one minus one minus
one
for my new
subsequence and this converges it's just
constant or if i chose the even ones i'd
get 1
1 1 1 1 1
and that converges
so this sequence which is bounded has a
convergent subsequence
now not all sequences have convergent
subsequences
for example if you look at the sequence
x sub n equals n so x of n is just 1 2 3
4 5 6 and so on
that will not have any convergent
subsequences because
any subsequence of that
has to be unbounded okay that's uh
pretty easy to to show
and we know that a convergent
sequence
is bounded okay
so
you know
what am i getting at
so the question that we're going to ask
and try to answer is the following
does every
bounded sequence
have a
convergent subsequence
okay and what i was just
going on about right there is that
we know this is true for for example for
the sequence minus one to the n
we also know this is true for
convergence sequences convergent
sequences are bounded so and they have
convergent subsequences
just take the
subsequence to be the whole sequence to
begin
with and we have to throw in this
bounded part because there are sequences
that don't have any convergent
subsequences like i just said x of n
equals n is a example of a unbounded
sequence that doesn't have any
convergence sequences subsequences
so
the answer to this question as we'll see
is yes this is a very
really a very powerful statement
and this is due to
bolzano and
wire strass
and i'll restate it in a little bit when
we get to to the statement of that
theorem namely that every bounded
sequence does have a convergence
subsequence there's several different
ways to to prove this theorem
um we're going to prove it by
introducing limb soup and limb imps
because these are also two important
objects that arise in analysis
so let's get to the definition of these
guys
so
let xn be
bounded sequence
and
we define
if they exist there's they're going to
be certain limits so it's not clear that
they exist at all to begin with but
we'll show that they always do exist
we define
limb soup
x sub n and sometimes i'll write n goes
to infinity underneath sometimes i'll
just write limb soup or i'll just have
an n underneath it this is
supposed to be a number and this is
equal to the limit as n goes to infinity
of a new sequence obtained from the old
sequence x sub n
what are the element what are the
entries of this new sequence
this is
soup of x sub k
k bigger than or equal to n
okay
and the limb imp
is similar
except it's now with imps
okay
so
for each natural number in
i take the supremum of
the set of elements x sub k for k bigger
than or equal to n so this is a bounded
set because the sequence is bounded so
this supremum is well defined same thing
for the inf okay so i get a number a new
number for each n
okay
and i take the limit of those numbers
and i define one to be the limb soup one
to be the limit
if they exist because you know limits
don't always exist so it's not even
clear that these two limits
actually are meaningful
and the first thing that we'll do is
we'll prove that
that these limits do actually always
exist
so rather than keep writing this i'm
going to give these uh
write some symbols for these two things
so let
a sub n to be
so of course if i forget to say this at
least in what i'm talking about with
respect to limp soup and i'm always
talking about a bounded sequence but let
me continue to state that as one of my
hypothesis let x of n be a bounded
sequence
and
let
a sub n be
the
supremum of the set of all elements x of
k
where k is bigger than or equal to n
and b sub n to be the
infimum of
x sub k a bigger than or equal to n
okay
so then there's
a couple of statements
one is
that the sequence a sub n
so remember i take uh
so let me just put over here
what uh these things have to do with the
limb soup and limb imp then you can
then the limb soup of x of n
this is defined to be the limit
as n goes to infinity of the a sub n's
and the limb inf
of x sub n this is
defined to be the limit as n goes to
infinity
of the b sub n's
okay
so we need to show what we're going to
show is that uh the limit of a sub n as
n goes to infinity of a sub n exists and
the limit as n goes to infinity of b sub
n exists so how we're going to show that
is we're going to show that a sub n is
monotone
decreasing
and bounded
and so these are the conclusions so
i should say
then
sequence b sub n is
monotone increasing and bounded
so in particular
since we know that
if we have a monotone sequence which is
bounded it has to converge
that means these
two limits exist
and then the second part of this theorem
is kind of the simple statement that
the lymph nth of x sub n
is less than or equal to the limb soup
of x sub n
okay
okay to prove one
so
in fact before i prove this theorem
let me prove a small
uh simple
kind of
theorem first so so let's put this
let's put put the proof of this theorem
on hold just for a second
and now prove a very simple theorem
that if a
and b
are subsets of real numbers
a b both not equal to the empty set
and a is the subset of b
so
also need to be bounded so if we take
two non-empty subsets of real numbers
such that
b are
bounded
and
a is the subset of b
then the conclusion is that
the info b
is less than or equal to
the f of a
and this is
always less than or equal to the soup of
a and this is less than or equal to
the soup of b
okay
so
what this says is that if i take a
subset of b
then that increases the inf
and decreases
the soup okay so the soup of a smaller
set is smaller than the soup of the
bigger set and that inequality reverses
for imps the imp of the smaller set is
bigger than or equal to the inf of the
bigger set
all right and this this just follows
immediately from uh
the definition of soup and if so i'll
just prove the soup statement
so
since soup of
b
is an upper bound
for b
and a is a subset of b
this implies that
suit b is
an upper bound
for a
suit b sits above everything in b a is a
subset of b so it sits above everything
for a
now the supremum of a is supposed to be
the least upper bound and therefore if i
take any upper bound for a that has to
be bigger than or equal to the soup of a
so since soup b is an upper bound for a
this implies that
soup a is less than or equal to
soup b and similarly with the imps so
i'm not going to write
um
so similar for imps
okay so let's go back
to the proof of uh this theorem here
that if i have a bounded sequence then
the limb soup and the limb exist and we
show that by
proving that
these two sequences have these
monotonicity properties so
proof now of the theorem we were
started off proving
okay
so
since the set of x k's
with k bigger than or equal to n plus 1
is a subset of
x k's for k
bigger than or equal to n
right because now i'm look i have a set
where k is starting at n plus 1 here's
the set with k starting at n so this is
clearly contained in here
this implies that
a sub n plus 1 which is the soup
of
the left hand side
um
by this little theorem that i stated
here is less than or equal to the soup
of
the bigger set
and this is just
a sub n
so we've proven for all in
a sub n plus 1 is less than or equal to
a sub n
okay therefore this uh
sequence is monotone decreasing
okay
and so
this uses the the soup part of this
previous uh theorem but if we use the
imp part then we also get the statement
for the b sub n so
uh
so rather than write out the details
i'll leave it to you just to flip around
the inequalities for the inf in your
notes so similarly
we're all in a natural number
b sub n is bigger than or equal to
b sub n plus one
or
other way
okay
now
uh so that shows these two sequences are
monotone now we show they're bounded
and this follows uh simply from the fact
that the x of n's are bounded since uh
there exist a b bigger than or equal to
0 such that
all n natural numbers
x sub n an absolute value is less than
or equal to b which is the same as
saying b is x of n is bounded between
minus b and capital b
so
taken as
elements of each of these sets if you
like this x of k k bigger than or equal
to n that means minus b is always a
lower bound for these sets and b is
always an upper bound for these sets
so this implies that
minus b is always less than or equal to
x sub k
okay bigger than or equal to n
and
this always sits
below the supremum
and the supremum since all of these are
bounded above by b the supremum has to
be less than or equal to b
okay
which i'll state in terms of the a sub
n's and b sub n's means
minus b is less than or equal to b sub n
is less than or equal to a sub n is less
than or equal to b
so these uh sequences are bounded
okay
so in fact these two
implies that
all right so we've shown that these two
sequences that define that we used to
define the limb soup and the limb imph
are monotone and bounded so therefore
the limit
of these two sequences
the limits which define the limb soup
and limb imp actually exists so limb
soup and limb imp is always a
well-defined object
now this proves one to prove two
this follows immediately from what we've
proven right here
so
by this uh part
we have
b sub n is less than or equal to a sub n
so for all n i have these two sequences
one sitting below the other and last
time we proved that
taking the limit respects inequality so
the limit as n goes to infinity of b sub
n which is the limb imph
sits below
the limit as n goes to infinity of a sub
n which is the lymph soup
and that completes the proof
so so for so i've shown that these two
objects we define the limb soup and the
lymph
exists
and are well defined for every bounded
sequence
so this is kind of uh can be a little
bit of a daunting
couple of objects to come across when
you especially in your first analysis
class
so the best thing to do is look at
examples whenever you come across
something that you just don't quite
understand
start writing down
you know some actual actual things
so for example
let's let's again look at
our favorite example of a bounded
sequence which does not converge
x sub n equals minus 1 to the n
okay
then if i
am looking at this set
x sub n
n bigger than or equal to k
uh in writing a set of x sub n let me
just write what it is minus 1 to the n
so what is this set this is just a set
consisting of two elements one and minus
one
yeah
and therefore the soup of this set
which is the soup of this set
is just one
oops
so if i take
which implies that the limb soup
of minus 1 to the n
which is the limit as
n goes to infinity of
soup
minus 1 to the n
and bigger than or equal to the k as we
just saw this is just the soup of this
set consisting of two elements 1 and
minus 1. this is equal to the limit
as n goes to infinity of one
equals one so the limb soup of minus one
to the n is one
now if i change all these supes to imps
then the if of this set is going to be
the inf of this set which is just minus
one
and therefore we also get
okay
so
the limb soup is one the limb inf is
minus one for this set
that's just supposed to be a squiggly
not line not necessarily looking like
um
sigma
okay so there's one sequence
now how about a
our next favorite sequence
x sub n equals one over n
so the set
of elements 1 over n such that n is
bigger than or equal so 1 over k i
should write oh so i was using some
this this is uh this should have been a
k
i didn't make that mistake throughout
no i kept writing x sub k
so that should be x sub k
okay all of that is written correctly
this should have been minus 1 to the k
minus 1 to the k
all right very good so
we're looking at now the set one over k
where n is
uh where k is
bigger than or equal to n
so this is just the set
uh
one over n
one over n plus one
one over n plus two
one over n plus three
and so on
okay
so
as i move to next the next entry things
are getting smaller and smaller and uh
in fact uh this sequence just here now
written as
um
thinking of this as a new
so this is not a sequence this is a set
but look taking entries to be these guys
um it's easy to see that that converges
to zero so anyways
let's say i i take the
supremum of this set
which is what i need to compute the limb
soup
so i'm now taking the supremum of
this set 1 over n plus 1 that's always
smaller than 1 over n and so is 1 over n
plus 2 and so on and so on and 1 over n
is an element of the set that's bigger
than or equal to everything else in the
set
and i think there's an exercise in the
homework that asks you to show that if
you have a set that contains an element
which is an upper bound for the set then
that has to be the supremum so the
supremum of this set is simply one over
n okay
so this supremum
is equal to one over n
so as n goes to infinity
the limit of this supremum here which
equals the limit as
n goes to infinity of one over n
equals zero okay so the limb soup
of one over n equals zero
okay
um
but now let's say i look at imps of this
set so i had to take soups to look at
the limb soup now let's say i take imps
okay
now the if of this set these are
elements that are getting closer and
closer and closer to zero
so
there's zero
one over n and then they just
keep getting smaller and smaller and
smaller and smaller converging to zero
so
and you can in fact prove prove this
rigorously if you'd like but i think
it's easy to to at least convince
yourself that the infimum of this set
is equal to zero okay the
smallest thing so first off zero is a
lower bound for
this set
and if i take
um
anything bigger than zero that thing
cannot be an upper bound simply because
of
if you like the archimedean property i
can always find something from the set
less than that
real num positive real number so 0 must
be the least upper bound
so
in summary the limb info of one over n
which is the inf the limit as n goes to
infinity of the inf of this set
is just the limit as n goes to infinity
of zero which equals zero
right
so the limb soup of one over n equals
zero the limb inf equals zero as well
okay
[Applause]
so let's take a look at these two uh
examples uh
uh
a little bit and and let me just make a
few remarks first off um
what what
what's to notice about this sequence
is
the fact that the limb soup is one limb
f is equal to minus one so the limb soup
does not equal the limb imp
however in this example the limb soup
which is zero equals the limb inf which
is zero
now what's the difference between these
two sequences um what's the property
that one holds but the one has what the
other doesn't this is a convergent
sequence and this one is not
so
um and we'll see this is a general fact
that if we have a convergence sequence
then the limb soup and the limb imp
equal each other
and are equal to the limit of the
original sequence because the sequence
converges to zero
um but that's not just a one-way street
it's a two-way street
that
in fact will prove if the limb soup
equals the limb imph then the original
sequence converges
okay so the sequence converges if and
only if the limb soup equals a limb
and we saw here that kind of that in on
display that the limp soup and the limit
don't equal each other and the original
sequence which uh we know
or shown last time doesn't converge
right um
and so
one other thing i'd like to point out is
that
so the limb soup of this guy is one the
limb f of this guy is a minus one
and
now we can also find a subsequence which
converges to one
which is the limb soup right we just
take the entries that we choose to be
the even uh
numbered entries
and that just gives produces a sequence
one
and
that sequence converges to one if we
take the odd entries of the sequence
that subsequence is just minus one and
converges to minus one which is the
limit and that's also a general fact
we'll prove that
for any bounded sequence there exists
subsequences converging to the lymph
soup and the limb imp and that will give
us the proof of this bolzano virustras
theorem
all right
and i think that's all of the remarks i
want to say um
and let me make one other important
comment
so this sequence which we use to define
the limb soup
and also the limb imp
um
in these
in three out of these four cases
they were actual subsequences right so
the soup of this set equals one which i
can consider as a subsequence of the
original guy
right and the same thing for the limb if
the limb the m f of this set was minus 1
which i can consider as a subsequence of
minus 1 to the n
and for the soup of this set
i got 1 over n which i can this is just
equal to the original sequence
so it's set definitely i can consider it
as a subsequence of the original
sequence but if i take the infimum of
this set
which i need to define the limb imp i
got 0 for every entry which is not a
subsequence of this original sequence
okay so all of that is to say that the
sequences i get
through this process to define the limb
soup and limb imp
are not necessarily subsequences of the
original sequence okay so that
um
what i just said a minute ago about
they're actually
being subsequences which do converge to
the limp soup and limb imp this is a
non-trivial fact which we're going to
prove
okay
so theorem and this will give us a
bolzano virustrasa essentially
immediately right after it
let xn be a
bounded sequence
then there exists subsequences
x n sub k
and
x m sub k
so they don't necessarily have to be the
same subsequence
subsequence
such that
limit as k goes to infinity of x sub n
sub k
equals
the limb soup so it's a convergent
subsequence
and the limit as k goes to infinity of x
m sub k produces the limb if
okay
and
so before i prove this
this immediately gives the bolzano
virustras theorem
which is that every bounded sequence
as a convergent subsequence
okay
so again this follows immediately from
the previous theorem because if i take a
bounded sequence
um by the previous theorem i can find a
subsequence which converges to the limb
soup which always exists for a bounded
sequence okay and then that's
uh that's the statement in fact we have
something stronger in that we have
at least two subsequences which converge
to these two numbers which may or may
not be the same
okay
so the reason this is um
you know kind of so
so powerful and so strong is that
it
to sort of get your hands on something
it doesn't require you to show something
as strong as showing there is a sequence
converging to that so quite often
you know you can think in terms of
variational problems where you want to
show that
a minimum of something always exists or
a
you know maximum of something always
exists
well
what you can try and do is is you know
take a sequence of
of guys that you stick into your so this
is a general nonsense that you stick
into your
machine or function that spits out
output and these outputs are approaching
the maximum or approaching the minimum
and what you'd like to say is that there
does in fact exist uh um
an element that you can stick into your
machine and produce the maximum amount
of output
now
you know maybe uh you know it's not
clear how to do that
so first take a sequence approaching so
that the values are approaching that
the outputs are approaching the maximum
maybe you could show
that the inputs converge to something
but that's typically really hard
and
but you don't have to work that hard is
what this theorem says it says that
what you
really need to do and which is much more
um straightforward or simpler or
possible really is to show that that
sequence of inputs that you put into
your machine to get the outputs
is a bounded sequence
okay then you could pass to a
subsequence which actually does converge
to something by this theorem
and
proceed in that way by showing that
you do have some minimum or max maximum
some input that produces a maximum
output or minimum output
um
so that's a bit a small bit of rambling
uh about why this theorem is so useful
is that
again it's
to get your hands on something that
typically you want to
study
it's very difficult to show
convergence to that thing you want to
study
or that that thing exists because
there's a sequence that you come up with
ad hoc actually converges to that thing
but this theorem says you don't need to
work that hard
or try to do the impossible and
typically it's much
easier just to
proceed by showing uh your sequence of
inputs is bounded okay so that's enough
uh
of that bit of rambling about why this
theorem is so useful
um
it's also useful in the study of pdes
which is what i study so i have a soft
spot for it
actually one of its
generalizations
alright so
let's prove this theorem that there
exists subsequences
which converge which uh converts to the
limb soup and limb inf okay
so as before i'm going to use rather
than keep writing the supremum of this
set and
i'm not going to actually i'm not even
going to do this statement i'm going to
leave this as an exercise i'm going to
do this
statement
i'm going to use this notation a sub n
as before
but a sub n b
soup of x sub k's
k bigger than or equal to n
so i want to show that there's something
converging to
the limit as n goes to infinity of the a
sub n's
and so what i'm going to do is i'm going
to trap a subsequence of elements
between
a sub n and a sub n minus
something
which is converging to 0 and not
quite a sub n so it'll be along a
subsequence as well
so
so we know that there exists
an n sub 1 bigger than or equal to 1.
simply by how this is defined as a
supremum and
by
the exercise from
assignment 3
that there exists a n sub 1 bigger than
or equal to 1 such that
a sub 1 minus 1 is less than or equal to
is less than x of
is less than or equal to a sub 1.
okay
all right
i mean that's uh a sub 1 minus 1
is a
is not an upper bound for the set a sub
1 which is x sub k is for k is bigger
than or equal to 1
therefore i should be able to find an
element from this set
strictly bigger than that and of course
it's always less than or equal to the
supremum which is a sub 1. okay
so now
since a sub n sub 1
plus 1 so a sub n sub 1 plus 1 not 1
plus 1.
since this thing equals the supremum of
x of k such k is bigger than or equal to
n sub 1 plus 1.
there exists
an a sub n sub
2.
at least
there exists a n sub 2
bigger than n sub 1 in fact it has to be
bigger than or equal to n sub 1 plus 1
such that
a sub n plus 1 minus
a half is less than a sub n sub 2
is less than or equal to a sub n
plus one
okay
so why the n sub 1 plus 1 is because i
wanted to obtain a new
entry from the sequence
that comes from farther
than the index n sub 1. okay i'm trying
to build a subsequence and like i said
the idea is
i want to somehow sandwich this should
be exa pen
i want to build up a subsequence which
is sandwiched between
things converging to the limb soup and
use the squeeze serum
all right
okay so since this is a supremum of this
set
that and because this thing is not an
upper bound for this set there exists
something from this set so some element
k bigger than or equal to n sub 1 plus 1
which i'm going to call n sub 2 so that
x of n sub 2 is bigger than a sub n plus
and a sub n sub 1
plus 1.
and then i just keep doing this
since
a sub
2 plus 1
equals the supremum of the x sub k such
that k is bigger than or equal to n sub
2 plus 1.
there exists an n sub 3 bigger than n
sub 2.
such that
a sub
n sub 2 plus 1
minus now a third
is less than x sub n sub 3
is less than or equal to a sub n sub 2
plus one
okay
but now we're essentially home free
[Applause]
we'll just continue in this manner
so let me write down
now strictly speaking
i need to state
the
um
construction of this sequence
as an inductive argument
but um
for the purposes of this class i'm not
going to do that i'm just going to
say continuing in this on in this manner
and that will be
what i say for
um
for this part so
continuing in this manner
we obtain a sequence of integers
natural numbers
n sub 1 less than n sub 2 less than n
sub 3
and so on
such that what holds
such that for all k a natural number
a sub n sub k
minus 1 plus 1
minus
1 over k is less than or equal to x
n sub k
less than or equal to a so n sub
k minus 1
plus 1.
okay
and here if you like we didn't define
what n sub zero is
so
uh
um
so really we're only interested in the
ends of one n sub two so but for the
sake of this whole thing making sense uh
for all integers k
uh with n sub zero being defined to be
zero okay that's just the
first case that we dealt with
okay so we obtain this uh subsequence x
of n sub k that's sandwiched in between
uh this subsequence of a's okay
and
minus one over k
and this subsequence of a sub n sub k
minus one
so
since
n sub 1 is less than n sub 2 and so on
this implies
that uh
let me write it this way n plus one is
less than
two plus one it's less than n sub three
plus one
so
this is a subsequence
a sub n sub k minus 1
plus 1
is a subsequence
of
ace events
now what do we know we know the ace of
n's converge to the limb soup
right
and we proved last time that every
subsequence of a convergent sequence
converges to the same thing
thus the limit as k goes to infinity of
a sub n sub k minus 1 plus 1
equals the limit of the original
sequence
which is
by definition the limb suit
okay
so now i have this subsequence
of x's
sandwiched in between two sequences
this guy on the left this guy on the
right this guy on the right converges to
the limb soup this guy on the left
converges to the limb soup minus 0
because 1 over k converges to 0.
so by the squeeze theorem
we get that
the limit as k goes to infinity of x of
n sub k
equals the limit as k goes to infinity
of
this and this whole thing which is the
limb soup
okay
and again so so i'll leave it to you to
do the lymph part
but the point is is that now
uh
basically this one over k gets moved to
over here and this becomes a sub n sub k
minus one plus one plus one over k and
now i just have this
on sitting below this guy all right
that's really the only change for the
imps
to get a subsequence converging to the
limb
okay
now
we've shown um that there exists a
subsequence converging to the limp soup
and the limb imp
which gives us the bolzano virus thrust
down
and now let me come back to the
statement i made about these two
sequences here
namely that
the limb soup equals the limb if and
only if the original sequence converges
so let's uh so let's prove that now
let x then be
a bounded sequence
then
xn converges if and only if
limb soup equals the limb
and there's one more part
moreover if xn converges
then
all these limits agree
equals the limb soup
equals the limit
okay
so
the sequence converges if and only if
the limb soup equals the limb imph and
in that case that uh
we do have this this limit of the
sequence is given by this common value
of the limb soup and limb
um
okay so
let's go uh
let's go in one direction
to do this direction we'll use the
squeeze theorem
so suppose
l equals
limb soup x of n equals the limb
m of x of n so here we're trying to
we're assuming that these two things
equal each other they're given by a
common value l
and what we're going to end up showing
is that this sequence converges to l so
that actually gives the the second part
of the statement of the statement of
this theorem here so suppose l is this
common
number
limb soup and limb
then for all in a natural number we have
that the inf
of the x of k's which is for k bigger
than or equal to n
so
x sub n is in this set so it's certainly
bigger than or equal to this m
and it's less than or equal to the suit
of that set
again because x sub n sits in this set
all right
but as n goes to infinity
this sequence of numbers converges to
the limb inf which is l
as n goes to infinity
uh this sequence of numbers converges to
the lymph soup which is l so by the
squeeze theorem the thing in between
which is x sub n converges to l
okay
so for the second part it's uh
follows from what we've proven
what we proved to obtain the bolzano
virus straws
and what we know about
convergent sequences and their
subsequences
so this is where this direction namely
that
convergence implies the limb soup equals
then limb
inf
so
let l be
the limit as n goes to infinity of x sub
n
so now we're assuming that the sequence
converges to something which we call l
doesn't have to be the same l from it's
not going to be
so it's just l i'm just using for for
this limit
by
previous theorem
there exists a subsequence
x of n sub k
such that the limit as
k goes infinity of x of n sub k
gives me
lymph soup
of x of n
but
this is a subsequence of a convergent
sequence and
a subsequence of a convergent sequence
is convergent and converges to the same
thing
so this thing on the left is just equal
to l
okay
similarly there exists a subsequence
x of n sub k
such that
the limit as k goes to infinity of x of
m sub k
equals limb f
of x sub n
and again this is a subsequence of a
convergent sequence
so it's convergent and converges to the
same thing l so that implies that
this
thing is equal to l
all right
and therefore the limb soup and the limb
if equal each other and they also equal
the limit of the original sequence so
that is uh
um
the end of uh
the proof of this theorem that the limb
soup and and limb if when they coincide
and tell you that the original sequence
converges so that's another way of
thinking about limb soups and limb imps
is that
they also somehow measure just how
divergent your sequence is
or at least the difference between them
if that difference is zero then your
original sequence is convergent
okay
all right so i think we'll stop there